---
layout: master
title: Constitution
---
* toc
{:toc}

# Mission Statement 

The [Open and Free Technology Community](/) (henceforth referred to as
"[OFTC](/)" or "the Network") was founded at the end of 2001 by a group of
experienced members of the Open Source and Free Software communities aiming to
provide these communities with better communication, development, and support
infrastructure. Our goal is to provide stable services to members of the
community in any part of the world, while listening closely to their needs and
desires.

## Administrative Structure 

The Administrative Structure of the Network is the system of governance the
Network will use.  Any action any member of Staff takes as Staff shall be
recorded in the Network's records as factually as is possible.

The following outlines all Staff positions.

### Network Operations Committee

The [Network Operations Committee](/Network Operations Committee) (henceforth
referred to as the "[NOC](/Network Operations Committee)") shall consist of no
fewer than six members. The [NOC](/Network Operations Committee) shall be
responsible for deciding the policies of the Network as a whole.

 1. [NOC Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair) shall be responsible for
calling and chairing [NOC](/Network Operations Committee) meetings. The
[Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair) shall also be responsible for the
appointment of Department Heads, from willing and able members of the
[NOC](/Network Operations Committee). The [Chair](/Network Operations Committee
Chair) is responsible for announcing elections, as well as appointing three vote
counters for said election.
1. Network [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman) is responsible
for hearing and acting upon complaints from users or [Staff](/staff) against any
member of [Staff](/staff) or the Network as a whole. The [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman)
has the power to issue Reprimands against any [Staff](/staff) member for
violating any [Network Policy](/Network_Policy), any part of the
[Constitution](/Constitution), or for abusing any of their privileges. This
reprimand may be turned over by a 3/4 majority vote of the active [NOC](/Network
Operations Committee) members. The [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman) may also recommend to
the [NOC](/Network Operations Committee) that further action be taken against
the [Staff](/staff) member. Reprimands against members of [NOC](/Network
Operations Committe) only take effect after the following [NOC](/Network
Operations Committee) meeting in order to prevent an [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman)
from being able to unilaterally dismiss the [NOC](/Network Operations
Committee). The [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman) is also responsible for issuing
[Commendations](/Commendations) to [Staff](/staff) members and volunteers who
are performing exemplary service to the network, which will be reflected on the
Network's records.
 1. [Department Heads](/Department Heads) responsibilities are to be set by the
Chair at the time of their appointment, as explicitly as is reasonable. The
[Department Heads](/Departments) shall be required to recruit [Department
Staff](/Department Staff) from willing and capable [Network Staff](/staff).
[Department Heads](/Departments) are strongly recommended to recruit at least
one [Deputy Head](/Deputy Head). That [Deputy Head](/Deputy Head) must be a
member of the [NOC](/Network Operations Committee).

### Network Operators

The [Network Operators](/Network_Operator) (henceforth referred to as
"[NetOps](/Network_Operator)") responsibilities shall be to enforce the Network
policies set forth by the [NOC](/Network Operations Committee). They shall also
help any and all users of the Network in any way possible, without prejudice.

Further responsibilities of [NetOps](/Network_Operator), and all privileges will
be defined in [Network Policy](/Network_Policy).

### Sponsors

[Server Sponsors](/Server_Sponsor) are responsible for maintaining the hardware,
connectivity, and operating system installation upon which our communications
software runs.

### Network Representatives

The [Network Representatives](/Network_Representative) (henceforth referred to
as the "[NetReps](/Network_Representative)") responsibilities are to assist
users in any way possible and to report problems back to
[NetOps](/Network_Operator), the [NOC](/Network Operations Committee), or the
[Ombudsman](/Ombudsman) for resolution if they cannot be solved without
privileged intervention.

## Inter-Election Staff Changes

A member of [Staff](/staff) who is inactive for sixty days without notice of
their absence shall be removed from [Staff](/staff). Any member of
[Staff](/staff) who announces their resignation shall have their privileges and
access removed.

Any vacancies in [Staff](/staff) positions shall be filled at the earliest
possible time by a standard vote of the [NOC](/Network Operations Committee),
based on candidates put forward by [NOC](/Network Operations Committee) members
and/or [NetOps](/Network_Operator). Candidates who are volunteers or who are
already on [Staff](/staff), and Candidates who have Commendations, shall be
favoured to fill any vacancies.

## Active and Inactive Staff

A [Staff](/staff) member who has not logged any activity in seven days will be
considered an [Inactive Staff](/Inactive Staff) member.

A [Staff](/staff) member who is Inactive for a period of sixty days will be
removed from [Staff](/staff), unless prior notice of their absence was given
including an estimated time of return which has not yet arrived.

An [Active Staff](/staff) member is any [Staff](/staff) member who is not
Inactive.

## Change in Staff positions

Any proposed change in any member of [Staff's](/staff) position or privileges
shall be approved by a standard [NOC](/Network Operations Committee) vote.

## Impeachment ##

In the event that a [Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair),
[Ombudsman](/Ombudsman), or any other member of the [NOC](/Network Operations
Committee) is performing poorly or in a manner detrimental to the network, it is
the duty of the [NetOps](/Network_Operator) and the rest of [NOC](/Network
Operations Committee) to bring about a vote of [No Confidence](/No Confidence)
against that [NOC](/Network Operations Committee) member.

Following a public discussion, the vote of [No Confidence](/No Confidence) must
get the votes of all active [NetOps](/Network_Operator) and [NOC](/Network
Operations Committee) members. In order for an [Impeachment](/Impeachment) to
take place, a minimum of 3/4 of all [NetOps](/Network_Operator) and a minimum of
3/4 of all [NOC](/Network Operations Committee) members must vote to remove that
member. An Impeached member will be stripped of all staff positions.

An [Impeachment](/Impeachment) vote must be complete within seven days of the
original call for a vote of [No Confidence](/No Confidence).

## Vacancy at the level of either Chair or Ombudsman

In the event that the [Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair) should, for
any reason, cease to be the [Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair), the
staff member who was positioned immediately following the [Chair](/Network
Operations Committee Chair) in the previous election shall assume the role of
[Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair).

In the event that the [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman) should, for any reason, cease to
be the [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman), the Chair will hold a vote of the [NOC](/Network
Operations Committee) for a new [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman) from among the Network's
staff.

The [Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair) and the [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman)
may not be the same person. In the event that the [Chair](/Network Operations
Committee Chair) is elected [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman), or the
[Ombudsman](/Ombudsman) ascends to [Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair),
that person must resign one of those roles.

## Reprimands

How members of [Staff](/staff) behave in public reflects upon the Network as a
whole. Therefore, any action which misrepresents [Network Policy](/Network_Policy)
may result in the Reprimand or dismissal of a member of [Staff](/staff).
Any Reprimands or dismissals, and the reasons therefore, shall be explained in
Network records.

A Reprimand carries the following weight:

 1. Active Reprimands: 7 day suspension from [Staff](/staff).
 1. Active Reprimands: 30 day suspension from [Staff](/staff).
 1. Active Reprimands: Dismissal from [Staff](/staff).

Appeals shall be handled by the [NOC](/Network Operations Committee) on a
case-by-case basis. The Ombudsman, who issued the reprimand, may only serve as a
witness to these proceedings; they shall not participate.

## Voting

### Eligibility and Candidates

In the interests of new staff not being unfairly punished during elections, no
new applications will be accepted in the 30 days prior to an election.

All voters shall also be candidates. There are no nominations. Any voter may
elect any other voter for any position. A voter must also vote themselves into
some position.

In the event that an [Active Staff](/staff) member can not vote during the
scheduled voting window, provisions must be made to allow them to vote in
advance.

### Announcement of Elections

Elections will be announced by the [Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair)
of the [NOC](/Network Operations Committee) on the 1st of the month in which an
election is going to take place.

### Election Dates 

Elections shall begin on the 8th and end on the 20th of every October.

### Vote Counting 

The three members of the counting staff (as appointed by the [Chair](/Network
Operations Committee Chair)) shall be responsible for announcing the results of
elections at the completion of counting. Noone but the [Chair](/Network
Operations Committee Chair) shall know who the counters are, including the other
counters, until the results are released by all counters. The votes themselves
must be anonymised so that the counters can not determine which ballot came from
which voter, while at the same time ensuring that no voter votes twice.

### Election Structure 

Elections must be held in a digital medium which allows all [Staff](/staff)
members to participate if they so choose. No voter may submit ballots by proxy.

 * Any outstanding issues which need to be voted on shall be listed on the
ballot.
 * Each voter is assigned a list of numbers, starting at 1, and ending at the
total number of candidates for *all* positions.
 * Each voter shall assign each candidate one number from the list of numbers.
A number shall not be given to more than one candidate. All numbers must be
used.
 * The individual with the lowest cumulative ranking will be the
[Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair).
 * The individuals with the first through to eighth rankings lowest will be the
[NOC](/Network Operations Committee).
 * Each voter will be given a blank area within which they can specify a
[Staff](/staff) member as [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman). The [Staff](/staff) member
with the most votes shall be the [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman).
 * In the event of a tie that affects the role of
[Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair), if no affected candidates agree to
resign to allow only one [Staff](/staff) member to be the [Chair](/Network
Operations Committee Chair), the highest and lowest ballot rankings of each
candidate will be removed and a new tally taken affecting all candidates. If
there is still no resolution, a first-past-the-poll run-off vote must be held
naming all tied candidates within 7 days.
 * In the event of a tie for the role of [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman), the lowest
numerically ranked candidate involved in the tie will assume the role of
[Ombudsman](/Ombudsman). If there is still no resolution, the procedure for
[Chair](/Chair) shall be followed for the [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman).
 * In the event of a tie at any other level, all affected candidates shall
assume the role of their ranking, even if this results in an enlarged
[NOC](/Network Operations Committee) or [NetOp](/Network_Operator) group.
 * In the event that the person elected [Ombudsman](/Ombudsman) is also the
[Chair](/Network Operations Committee Chair), that person must choose one
position, and the next-lowest individual will fulfil the role that the lowest
numerically ranked individual declined
 * The individuals with the ninth- through sixteenth-lowest rankings shall be
the [Network Operators](/Network_Operator).
 * All remaining candidates shall be [NetReps](/Network_Representative).
 * Each voter will be given a blank area within which they can ask for a
specific staff member to be removed. If more than 50% of the received ballots
list a person to be removed, that person will be removed.

### Forced Elections 

If the [NOC](/Network Operations Committee) shrinks to below six members for
more than thirty days, a new election must be held if none is scheduled within
the following thirty days.

## Network Policy 

In addition to this [Constitution](/Constitution), there also exists a [Network
Policy](/Network_Policy) document. The purpose of this document is to decide the
day-to-day operations of the Network. It shall not conflict with any articles in
this [Constitution](/Constitution).

Any Policy enacted in the [Network Policy](/Network_Policy) document shall have
the same weight as any article in this [Constitution](/Constitution). The
[Network Policy](/Network_Policy) document may be altered by any standard
[Network Operations Committee](/Network Operations Committee) vote.

## Amendments 

Amendments to this document must be approved three quarters by all
[NOC](/Network Operations Committee) members and three quarters all [Network
Operators](/Network_Operator).

